[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello, everybody.
I'm Peta Stapleton.
It's so lovely to be
here with you today.
I'm a clinical and health
psychologist and also
an associate professor in
psychology at Bonn University,
Queensland, Australia.
And what I've done for
the last, at least,
dozen years, since
about 2010, is
research a technique called
EFT, or Emotional Freedom
Techniques.
Which sounds like a mouthful.
And it has sort of become known
as something called tapping.
Because that really describes
what we do in this technique.
And ultimately, what it is
is a stress reduction tool.
So it has been proven now-- and
we'll talk about that today--
how it actually affects
stress in the body,
not only at a hormone
level, but other physiology.
So we've really got this
stress-reduction tool that uses
accupoints-- so
acupressure points--
on the body.
And because we tap on them
with two fingers instead
of using needles like
traditional acupuncture does,
that's where this term "tapping"
has actually come from.
So we have Emotional Freedom
Techniques, EFT, or tapping.
And so today, I really
want to share with you what
it is, how it works, the
research and evidence that
has actually been gathering
over the last decade,
and then how to use it
for really common things,
ideally, stress and worry.
Because that's such a big common
thing in everyone's lives.
And then how it can
actually be applied to so
many other different areas.
The one thing we've
learned in psychology
is that stress seems to underlie
so many different things
in life.
And if can do something
about stress--
and tapping is a perfect
solution for that--
then we can actually think more
clearly, make better decisions,
that type of thing.
And, of course, people then
have responses physically
with things like chronic pain
and different sort of disorders
and things like that.
So it is this
stress-reduction tool.
It's this technique
that we self apply.
So while somebody could actually
teach you how to do tapping,
we actually self apply it.
And so we actually have children
as young as four and five
years of age who can be taught
how to use tapping as well.
Of course, when we use
tapping with little ones,
it's a faster process.
They tend not to
have as many layers
that they need to deal with.
And within a couple
of minutes, they
can actually be
skipping out the door.
And whatever it
was that they were
worried about after a couple
of rounds of tapping has gone.
So we tap on these pressure
points that are on the body.
And we actually use some words
in conjunction with that.
So at an academic,
health point of view,
we actually talk
about EFT or tapping
being a psycho-physiological
technique.
So we have this psychology
element of this cognitive--
the words that we say.
And it's really quite mindful.
So when we get into
tapping, it appears
as though we're tapping on the
negative a lot of the time.
We're actually
saying our problem,
which is really counterintuitive
to a lot of psychology
techniques, when
you think about it.
It's not a positive
mindset, reframe.
It's not that type
of affirmation.
It's more about,
what is my problem?
And I'm going to
state it out loud.
And when we do that, we stay
really present and mindful.
The ingredient here
that's really important
is we actually have to tap
on the acupressure points.
So tapping on the
pressure points
while we state what's
happening for us sends
a signal back to the part of the
brain sending out that stress
response.
And that's what we know
through research calms down.
So if we walked through
the process now,
we would typically
only do EFT or tapping
when we have a problem.
We will talk at
some point about,
how can I use it
for the positive?
But, really, it's a technique
to reduce stress or distress
of any level.
So we would actually frame
our problem in a sentence.
And we tend to use the
same formula all the time.
And the sentence really
goes along the lines of,
even though I have
this problem, whatever
it might be, I accept
that I have this problem.
Now, the end of that
phrase can be changed.
It can be whatever it is
that somebody wants to say.
The traditional
way of doing EFT,
back when it actually
first came about,
was to say something like, even
though I have this problem,
I deeply and completely
love and accept myself.
And many people might
be familiar with that.
And of course, if that feels
comfortable to a lot of people,
you can absolutely say that.
But all it really is
about stating the problem
and accepting, I have
this problem right now.
The tapping is the part
that does something
about that problem, which
is what we're all after.
So it's really about,
I have this problem,
I accept I have it,
but I'm now going
to do something with that.
So as we state our
sentence, we tend
to tack on the side of
the hand point here.
So most of the time, we
tap with our dominant hand
and with two fingers.
So we would tap on the
side of the hand point
as we state our sentence.
And again, that
sentence, if I just
for a moment focus on something
like, "I feel overwhelmed,"
I would say, "even though I
feel overwhelmed right now,
I accept I feel this way."
We tend to say it
three times just
to get in that present moment.
So even though I feel
overwhelmed at the moment,
I accept I feel this way.
Even though I feel
overwhelmed at the moment,
I accept I feel this way.
And then after we've
set that statement up,
we come to the very first
pressure point, which
is the start of the eyebrow.
So we actually tap there
with the two fingers.
And what we would say
is a shortened version.
And it tends to be
focused on the feeling,
this overwhelmed feeling.
So I would just say a short
word out of my sentence.
The next point is the side of
the eye where it does dip in.
And we would say,
"this overwhelm."
The next point is under
the eye, on the bone.
And again, we would tap there
and say, "this overwhelm."
The next point is
actually under the nose.
This overwhelm.
So you can see I'm
repeating and staying
present with how I feel.
The next point is on the chin,
the crease there, tapping.
I feel overwhelmed.
The next point is
under the collarbone.
So if you come to the
ends of the collarbone
and come down about an inch,
you can tap on one side.
Some people like to tap
on both with both fingers.
We tap there and say,
"this overwhelm."
The next point is under the arm.
And it's about four inches
down from the armpit.
So if you were to measure
down, it's about there.
We tap there and say,
"this overwhelm."
And the last point is the
dead center of the head.
So we would tap
in the dead center
there and say, "this overwhelm."
And that's what we call a
cycle or a round of tapping.
So it's a single round.
We ask people to take a breath
at that point and just tune in.
If it was something physically
that you were tapping on
that you could feel,
even if it was emotional,
you could tune into that
to see, how does that
feel at the moment?
And the way that we work
out that it's actually
having any shift or impact is
to give it a number out of 10.
So 10 represents the most
distress you would ever feel.
And 0 represents, I'm
completely calm and relaxed,
this is not a problem.
Now, most of the
time, you can guess.
If I guessed what my
level was out of 10,
a number might
just come to mind.
You don't need to question it.
Or you could just
think, how does it
feel if 10 was the
worst and 0 was calm?
So as we tap through
each round, we
would come back in and check,
how do I feel at the moment?
So what number would I give
this out of 10 right now?
Now, if it's not
somewhere near a 0 or a 1,
we would repeat the round by
coming back to the eyebrow
point and tap again.
So "this overwhelm."
And we would continue
through all the points
until we got back to taking that
breath and checking in again.
How does it feel?
Has anything else come to
mind, which sometimes occurs?
What number will I
give it out of 10?
And of course, as we continue
through that process,
most people are quite astounded
at how fast it actually
works for them to
suddenly be in a space,
after maybe five rounds
of tapping, which may only
take five minutes, to
suddenly feel much calmer.
And signs of relaxation
or that number of 0 or a 1
tend to be things like yawning.
So yawning and tapping
is the only time
as a therapist we
don't get offended.
Because our clients
aren't bored.
It's actually a sign of
a neurological shift.
So as we're tapping,
if we find we
do want to start yawning, and
sometimes, every now and again,
spontaneous laughter
will be a sign, as well.
But yawning is the
most common one.
People will start to yawn and
even have a cognitive shift,
like, I don't know why this
was such a bother to me 5,
10 minutes ago.
I don't know why I
was worried about it.
They might even
also say, it seems
like it's much more
distant from me now
and I feel like I could
think more clearly
about that problem.
And of course, all of those are
a sign that tapping is actually
working.
Of course, at any
point, if anyone
felt they needed any more
professional assistance,
of course, worldwide, there are
practitioners that can actually
help people if
they want to use it
for different types of things.
And as we talk
about the research,
we will talk about
how, indeed, it
can help so many different
psychological conditions as
well as physical ones.
So it's something
that's self applied.
Children as young as
4 and 5 can actually
use this as well,
of course right
through to 95 years of age.
And certainly, we've
had lots of people
in our clinical
trials over the years
be in those age categories
getting the benefit
from tapping as well.
It can be applied to so many
different areas, everything
from stress, like
we said, but right
through to chronic pain, as
well as psychological disorders.
And we'll go through
some of those today.